README.md, before:

<div align="center">
  <img src="static/Logo AAF.png" alt="AAF Logo" width="150"/>
</div>

# aafai-bus: An On-Demand Asynchronous Task Processor

> **Note:** This entire project, including the Python/Flask server, the Google Apps Script client, all documentation, and the complete test suite, was generated by **Google's Gemini Code Assistant** in PyCharm in under four hours, with no lines of code or documentation produced by a human.

## 1. Purpose

**aafai-bus** is a lightweight, on-demand Python server designed to handle long-running, resource-intensive tasks that are delegated from other services. Its primary use case is to act as a "boot-on-demand mini bus" for batch-processing occasional deep internet searches, such as those requiring a full browser via Selenium.

The core goal is to **minimize cloud costs** by keeping the server turned off by default. It is started on-demand by a client, processes a queue of tasks, and then automatically shuts itself down after a period of inactivity.

## 2. Architecture

The system is designed around a client-server model where the client is expected to have the ability to start the server's Virtual Machine (e.g., via a cloud provider's API).

**Typical Flow:**

1.  **Client (e.g., Google Apps Script in a GSheet):** A user triggers an action in a Google Sheet.
2.  **Start VM:** The Apps Script calls the Google Cloud API to start the `aafai-bus` VM instance.
3.  **Submit Task:** Once the VM is running, the script sends a task to the server's `/inbound` endpoint. The server writes the task to a file-based queue and immediately returns a `job_id`.
4.  **Process Task:** The server's background scheduler picks up the task from the queue, executes the requested action, and writes the result to an outbound file.
5.  **Poll for Result:** The Apps Script sets up a time-based trigger to periodically call the server's `/outbound` endpoint with the `job_id`.
6.  **Retrieve Result:** Once the task is complete, the `/outbound` endpoint returns the final JSON result.
7.  **Auto-Shutdown:** After a configurable period of inactivity and once all tasks are processed, the server initiates a full power-off of the VM.

## 3. Security Architecture

The server is secured using a two-pronged approach: a network firewall to block unauthorized requests and a specific `sudo` rule to allow the application to safely shut itself down.

### 3.1. Network Firewall (GCP)

To ensure the server only accepts requests from trusted sources, we configure a firewall rule to allow traffic only from Google's IP ranges.

1.  **Find Google's IP Ranges:** Run the following command to get the current IP ranges for Apps Script:
    ```sh
    nslookup -q=TXT _appsscript.google.com
    ```
2.  **Create a Firewall Rule:** In your GCP project, navigate to **VPC network > Firewall** and create a new **ingress** rule with the following settings:
    - **Name:** `allow-google-apps-script`
    - **Targets:** Apply the rule to your VM using a specific **target tag** (e.g., `aafai-bus-server`).
    - **Source IPv4 ranges:** Enter the IP blocks from step 1.
    - **Protocols and ports:** `tcp:8000` (or your Gunicorn port).
3.  **Tag Your VM:** Add the network tag (e.g., `aafai-bus-server`) to your VM instance in **Compute Engine**.

### 3.2. Auto-Shutdown Permissions

The application runs as the low-privileged `www-data` user. To allow it to power off the entire VM after 30 minutes of idle time, you must grant it a specific, passwordless `sudo` permission.

1.  **Edit the Sudoers File:** On your Debian server, run `sudo visudo`. This is the only safe way to edit this file.
2.  **Add the Rule:** Scroll to the very bottom of the file and add this exact line:
    ```
    www-data ALL=(ALL) NOPASSWD: /sbin/shutdown --poweroff now
    ```
This highly specific rule allows the `www-data` user to do one thing and one thing only: power off the machine.

## 4. Testing Strategy

The project includes a comprehensive test suite using `pytest`. The tests are organized to ensure reliability and maintainability.

To run the tests, execute the following command from the project root:
```sh
pytest
```

### Unit Tests (`tests/unit/`)
Unit tests are focused on testing individual functions and components in isolation. They use **mocks** to simulate the behavior of external dependencies.

### Functional & Integration Tests
These tests verify that different parts of the system work together correctly. A key integration test starts a real, live HTTP server to test the Selenium action against a local, stable web page.

## 5. Features

- **Dynamic Action System:** Add new capabilities by simply dropping a Python file into the `actions/` directory.
- **File-Based Queue:** A simple, durable, and transparent queueing system.
- **Asynchronous Processing:** Uses `APScheduler` with a thread pool to handle multiple tasks concurrently.
- **On-Demand & Auto-Shutdown:** Designed to be started by a client and automatically powers off the VM when idle.
- **Gunicorn & Systemd:** Ready for production deployment using industry-standard tools.

## 6. Setup & Deployment

### Python Environment
1.  Clone the repository.
2.  Create and activate a virtual environment: `python -m venv .venv` & `source .venv/bin/activate`.
3.  Install dependencies: `pip install -r requirements.txt`.
4.  Install a Selenium WebDriver (e.g., `chromedriver`) and ensure it is in your system's PATH.

### Production Deployment (Linux)
1.  Copy the `aafai-bus.service` file to `/etc/systemd/system/`.
2.  Update paths in the service file to match your deployment directory.
3.  Reload the systemd daemon: `sudo systemctl daemon-reload`.
4.  Enable and start the service: `sudo systemctl enable --now aafai-bus.service`.

## 7. Configuration

Configuration is managed via environment variables, set in the `aafai-bus.service` file for production.

- `APP_ENV`: `production` or `development`.
- `QUEUE_BASE_PATH`: Absolute path for storing queues (e.g., `/var/www/aafai-bus/prod_queues`).

## 8. API Endpoints

### `POST /inbound`
Submits a new task.
- **Body:** `{ "action": "action_name", "params": { ... } }`
- **Response:** `{ "status": "received", "job_id": "..." }`

### `GET /outbound`
Polls for a task result.
- **URL:** `/outbound?job_id=...`
- **Pending Response:** `{ "status": "pending", ... }`
- **Complete Response:** `{ "status": "complete", "result": { ... } }`

## 9. Google Apps Script Integration

An example client implementation using Google Apps Script can be found here: [examples/google_apps_script/master-bus.gs](examples/google_apps_script/master-bus.gs).

This script can be added to a Google Sheet to:
- Provide a custom menu to start tasks.
- Automatically start the `aafai-bus` VM on Google Cloud.
- Submit tasks and poll for results.
- Save the final text result to a file in the user's Google Drive.

Commit message:

Final touch on the recursive download and the README.md

README.md, after:

<div align="center">
  <img src="static/Logo AAF.png" alt="AAF Logo" width="150"/>
</div>

# aafai-bus: An On-Demand Asynchronous Task Processor

> **Note:** This entire project, including the Python/Flask server, the Google Apps Script client, all documentation, and the complete test suite, was generated by **Google's Gemini Code Assistant** in PyCharm in under four hours, with no lines of code or documentation produced by a human.

## 1. Purpose

**aafai-bus** is a lightweight, on-demand Python server designed to handle long-running, resource-intensive tasks that are delegated from other services. Its primary use case is to act as a "boot-on-demand mini bus" for batch-processing occasional deep internet searches, such as those requiring a full browser via Selenium.

The core goal is to **minimize cloud costs** by keeping the server turned off by default. It is started on-demand by a client, processes a queue of tasks, and then automatically shuts itself down after a period of inactivity.

## 2. Architecture

The system is designed around a client-server model where the client is expected to have the ability to start the server's Virtual Machine (e.g., via a cloud provider's API).

**Typical Flow:**

1.  **Client (e.g., Google Apps Script in a GSheet):** A user triggers an action in a Google Sheet.
2.  **Start VM:** The Apps Script calls the Google Cloud API to start the `aafai-bus` VM instance.
3.  **Submit Task:** Once the VM is running, the script sends a task to the server's `/inbound` endpoint. The server writes the task to a file-based queue and immediately returns a `job_id`.
4.  **Process Task:** The server's background scheduler picks up the task from the queue, executes the requested action, and writes the result to an outbound file.
5.  **Poll for Result:** The Apps Script sets up a time-based trigger to periodically call the server's `/outbound` endpoint with the `job_id`.
6.  **Retrieve Result:** Once the task is complete, the `/outbound` endpoint returns the final JSON result.
7.  **Auto-Shutdown:** After a configurable period of inactivity and once all tasks are processed, the server initiates a full power-off of the VM.

## 3. Security Architecture

The server is secured using a two-pronged approach: a network firewall to block unauthorized requests and a specific `sudo` rule to allow the application to safely shut itself down.

### 3.1. Network Firewall (GCP)

To ensure the server only accepts requests from trusted sources, we configure a firewall rule to allow traffic only from Google's IP ranges.

1.  **Find Google's IP Ranges:** Run the following command to get the current IP ranges for Apps Script:
    ```sh
    nslookup -q=TXT _appsscript.google.com
    ```
2.  **Create a Firewall Rule:** In your GCP project, navigate to **VPC network > Firewall** and create a new **ingress** rule with the following settings:
    - **Name:** `allow-google-apps-script`
    - **Targets:** Apply the rule to your VM using a specific **target tag** (e.g., `aafai-bus-server`).
    - **Source IPv4 ranges:** Enter the IP blocks from step 1.
    - **Protocols and ports:** `tcp:8000` (or your Gunicorn port).
3.  **Tag Your VM:** Add the network tag (e.g., `aafai-bus-server`) to your VM instance in **Compute Engine**.

### 3.2. Auto-Shutdown Permissions

The application runs as the low-privileged `www-data` user. To allow it to power off the entire VM after 30 minutes of idle time, you must grant it a specific, passwordless `sudo` permission.

1.  **Edit the Sudoers File:** On your Debian server, run `sudo visudo`. This is the only safe way to edit this file.
2.  **Add the Rule:** Scroll to the very bottom of the file and add this exact line:
    ```
    www-data ALL=(ALL) NOPASSWD: /sbin/shutdown --poweroff now
    ```
This highly specific rule allows the `www-data` user to do one thing and one thing only: power off the machine.

## 4. Testing Strategy

The project includes a comprehensive test suite using `pytest`. The tests are organized to ensure reliability and maintainability.

To run the tests, execute the following command from the project root:
```sh
pytest
```

### Unit Tests (`tests/unit/`)
Unit tests are focused on testing individual functions and components in isolation. They use **mocks** to simulate the behavior of external dependencies.

### Functional & Integration Tests
These tests verify that different parts of the system work together correctly. A key integration test starts a real, live HTTP server to test the Selenium action against a local, stable web page.

## 5. Features

- **Dynamic Action System:** Add new capabilities by simply dropping a Python file into the `actions/` directory.
- **File-Based Queue:** A simple, durable, and transparent queueing system.
- **Asynchronous Processing:** Uses `APScheduler` with a thread pool to handle multiple tasks concurrently.
- **On-Demand & Auto-Shutdown:** Designed to be started by a client and automatically powers off the VM when idle.
- **Gunicorn & Systemd:** Ready for production deployment using industry-standard tools.

## 6. Setup & Deployment

### Python Environment
1.  Clone the repository.
2.  Create and activate a virtual environment: `python -m venv .venv` & `source .venv/bin/activate`.
3.  Install dependencies: `pip install -r requirements.txt`.
4.  Selenium WebDriver is automatically managed by `selenium-manager`. However, you need to ensure that a compatible browser (like Google Chrome or Chromium) is installed on your system.

### Selenium and Headless Chrome Configuration

The `full_recursive_download` action utilizes Selenium with a headless Chrome browser for web crawling. This section outlines important considerations for its setup and operation.

#### Headless Chrome Dependencies
For the headless Chrome browser to function correctly in a Linux environment (such as a Debian-based VM), you need to install the browser itself and its common dependencies.

```sh
sudo apt-get update
sudo apt-get install -y google-chrome-stable # Or chromium-browser
sudo apt-get install -y fonts-liberation libappindicator3-1 libasound2 libatk-bridge2.0-0 libatk1.0-0 libc6 libcairo2 libcups2 libdbus-1-3 libexpat1 libfontconfig1 libgbm1 libgcc1 libglib2.0-0 libgtk-3-0 libnspr4 libnss3 libpango-1.0-0 libpangocairo-1.0-0 libstdc++6 libx11-6 libx11-xcb1 libxcb1 libxcomposite1 libxcursor1 libxdamage1 libxext6 libxfixes3 libxrandr2 libxrender1 libxss1 libxtst6 lsb-release wget xdg-utils
```

#### Selenium Manager and Driver Cache
Selenium Manager (included with the `selenium` Python package) automatically downloads and manages the correct WebDriver binary (e.g., `chromedriver`) for your installed browser.

-   **`SE_CACHE_PATH`**: The `full_recursive_download` action sets the `SE_CACHE_PATH` environment variable to a job-specific temporary directory (`job_download_dir/selenium_manager_cache`). This ensures that each job uses its own isolated driver cache, preventing conflicts and allowing for proper cleanup.

#### Chrome User Data and `HOME` Environment Variable
Headless Chrome often attempts to write user-specific data (like profiles, caches, and crash dumps) to the user's home directory. When running as a low-privileged user (e.g., `www-data`), this can lead to permission errors if the default `HOME` directory is not writable.

-   **`HOME`**: The `_setup_driver` function in `full_recursive_download.py` explicitly sets the `HOME` environment variable to a temporary directory created for the driver instance. This forces Chrome to store all its user-specific files within this temporary, writable location, resolving potential permission issues. This temporary directory is cleaned up after the driver quits.

### Production Deployment (Linux)
1.  Copy the `aafai-bus.service` file to `/etc/systemd/system/`.
2.  Update paths in the service file to match your deployment directory.
3.  Reload the systemd daemon: `sudo systemctl daemon-reload`.
4.  Enable and start the service: `sudo systemctl enable --now aafai-bus.service`.

## 7. Configuration

Configuration is managed via environment variables, set in the `aafai-bus.service` file for production.

- `APP_ENV`: `production` or `development`.
- `QUEUE_BASE_PATH`: Absolute path for storing queues (e.g., `/var/www/aafai-bus/prod_queues`).

## 8. API Endpoints

### `POST /inbound`
Submits a new task.
- **Body:** `{ "action": "action_name", "params": { ... } }`
- **Response:** `{ "status": "received", "job_id": "..." }`

### `GET /outbound`
Polls for a task result.
- **URL:** `/outbound?job_id=...`
- **Pending Response:** `{ "status": "pending", ... }`
- **Complete Response:** `{ "status": "complete", "result": { ... } }`

## 9. Google Apps Script Integration

An example client implementation using Google Apps Script can be found here: [examples/google_apps_script/master-bus.gs](examples/google_apps_script/master-bus.gs).

This script can be added to a Google Sheet to:
- Provide a custom menu to start tasks.
- Automatically start the `aafai-bus` VM on Google Cloud.
- Submit tasks and poll for results.
- Save the final text result to a file in the user's Google Drive.
